Dearest darling Herbert,

What excitement we have had! 

Mother and I boarded our train on Thursday. The conductor was a charming man. I swear he held my hand for just a moment too long. The weather was terrible, of course, but we were heading for the sun, and neither of us cared one jot. Then the thunderstorm started, which terrified Mother. She shrieked like she had seen a dozen mice with every rumble and flash. It was good fortune we shared our carriage solely with a group of nuns from a silent order. Their luggage labels showed they were heading on a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. One wonders how they afforded first-class travel. Mother was distraught, but the ladies were charming and prayed for us throughout the storm. At least, I think they included us in their prayers as they constantly waved their crosses and prayer books at us. I'm sure they did not mind my cigarette smoke. They were only menthol, after all.

It was a disappointment you could not be with us. What a comfort that would have been. Such a shame you could not leave your poor Mr. Ross. If only the dear old thing had passed away when expected. Oh, how terribly callous that must sound, but you know, Herbert, our dear neighbour, is suffering so much. I wish you could ease his pain. Well, I shall say no more on that subject.

We arrived safely in Liverpool just in time for dinner at our hotel. It is a divine place. If the weather had improved, I should have joined a group of handsome young men for tennis. We met them in the hotel lounge last evening. One of them is the cousin of Ronnie Montagu. Do you remember him? The red-headed chap who flirted with me outrageously last August. I'm sure you were jealous, as you did not say a word to me all evening. Instead, I tested the water in the swimming pool this morning. I have a daring new costume! Do you like the photograph, and are you shocked by your brazen fiancee? Perhaps you will sleep with it under your pillow and dream of me. 

Earlier this afternoon, Mother and I took a walk, but several men were begging in the street! Can you believe it, darling? Why were they not at work? One of them said to Mother that he had not eaten for two days. He had the most dishevelled and unpleasant appearance, so we returned to the hotel for afternoon tea.

Tomorrow, we will board the ship at 3.00 pm. I do hope you will write soon.

Your adoring Dorothea.

–0–

Saturday 8th October 1932 - London

Dear Miss Dorothea,

Thank you for taking the time from your busy day to write to me. I am glad you and her ladyship arrived at your hotel without incident.

Mr. Ross is much improved today. Dyspepsia is a most painful condition, but I do not believe it to be fatal. While I appreciate he seems, to you, to be of advanced years, I have no reason to expect his imminent death. I would be most distressed if you thought I cared about the legacy I shall receive on his passing. I assure you; Miss Dorothea, I do not need the money. It is sad Mr. Ross does not have a family to benefit from his generosity.

The photograph you enclosed was indeed daring. I will keep it locked away as I would not wish the housekeeper to see it. She is subject to heart palpitations.

I am very grateful for your friendship Miss Dorothea, but may I politely request that you not refer to me as your fiance? Her ladyship would not approve. I am sure this is your wonderful sense of humour at play, and in time, you will find a suitable young man of your own social class.

I have heard people are starving in the streets of many of our northern cities because of the depression. Exports of coal have fallen, and the mines have closed. They report that one million men are out of work. As a result, the ports have fewer merchant ships, and the Liverpool dockyards are laying men off. I am sorry that you and her ladyship had an unpleasant encounter.

Today I am driving Mr. Ross to the House of Commons to meet Mr. Ramsey MacDonald. The Prime Minister wishes to discuss further limitations to importing foreign goods. I shall take a walk around the National Gallery while I wait.

I wish you a pleasant voyage.

Your humble servant, Herbert Morris.

–0–

Monday 10th October 1932 - RMS Lancastria, Cartagena

Darling Boy, 

I had to share the news, such excitement as I have ever known. We have had a rescue at sea! Dozens of dear little Belgian sailors surround us. Their ship sank this morning. I do loathe the Bay of Biscay. It makes one feel a little drunk, reeling from one side of the boat to the other, and poor Mother could only keep down a little turtle soup, a small portion of pheasant pie, and only one dessert! I believe the crew is sharing their rations with the Belgians. 

There has been an appeal to the passengers for donations to help the sailors, who will be ashore tomorrow morning. Mother has a fur coat that has a little blight. I am sure she will not miss it. The change to our itinerary has upset Mother very much. She is looking forward to reaching Lisbon. She has instructed our steward to fetch the captain at once.

Mother tells me that Mr. Ross is worth some £100000! I am delighted for your good fortune, my darling. We shall have great fun when we are married. When do you think that might be? I hear that Mr. Ross has a diseased heart. I am sure you take great care of his medication. It would be sad if he were to overdose accidentally. 

Write soon, my beloved. I long to hear your news.

Your adoring, Dorothea.

–0–

Friday 14th October 1932 - London

Dear Miss Dorothea

Your letter arrived 'par avion,' this morning. It was most exciting to receive the post with a Spanish stamp. The housekeeper, Miss Harris, was delighted to have the postage stamps to give to her nephew.

We heard the news of the SS Scheldestad on the radio. How tragic that some 40 sailors lost their lives. I feel a sense of great sadness for the mothers who have lost their sons and wives that will never see the return of their husbands. We in the servants' hall have donated a small sum of money that the vicar will send to the bereaved. Reverend Jones knew several Belgian refugees from his parish in Folkestone during the Great War.

It surprised me to hear that some 250000 Belgians arrived in England when the Germans invaded. How sad they lost their home to invaders, only to return home, without choice, when the war ended. The Reverend said the government wanted the jobs back for returning servicemen. Miss Harris had a niece who was a conductress on a tram. She also lost her employment, as a soldier required the job. Miss Harris believes they will one day pay men and women the same wages for the same work, but I fear that is most unlikely.

Mr. Ross met with the Prime Minister. Mr. MacDonald is a good man but in poor health, and Mr. Ross says he can not remain in power for much longer. The Tories dominate the National Government, and his Labour policies have little support. The newspapers once again reported that his son was a conscientious objector during the war. It did not reflect well upon him.

My employer is enjoying good health. The rumours of his heart's weakness are ill-informed, and he is not currently taking any medication. I would most respectfully beg you not to consider me as an object of your affection, Miss Dorothea. I believe some may have exaggerated my expectations, and I would not wish to disappoint you.

Your humble servant,

Herbert Morris.

–0–

Tuesday 18th October 1932 - Villa Santa Maria, Lisbon

Dearest Herbert,

I am so glad to hear that Mr. Ross is well. I hope he is not overdoing things with all his political work. Mother says he should not concern himself with the north when things are so bad in London. I swear we waited over half an hour for a porter to collect our bags at the station. Why are men unemployed when clearly there is a need for essential workers? But enough of political matters, I am sure I will exhaust myself with such thinking. Dolly Matthews says I worry far too much.

Mother and I were reminiscing this morning about your dear father, how he carried me on his shoulders when I was a child. It was such fun galloping around the yard pretending he was a pony. Oh, how we laughed when he lost a shoe. Happy days. He was a great valet and a staunch friend to dear Mr. Ross. It is honourable that Ross should regard you as a son and heir. I describe you this way to my dearest friends.

We are staying here until April. If Mr. Ross should succumb to the winter influenza, please join us here, my darling. I would love to write more, but Mother and I are going to a party with some film director and his chums. They smoke the most delightful Turkish cigarettes.

Until we meet again,

Your adoring Dorothea

–0–

24th October 1932 - London

Dear Miss Dorothea

Thank you for your most entertaining letter.

This morning I drove Mr. Ross to Trafalgar Square. There was a most deplorable scene when the National Hunger Marchers met with Mr. Mosley's British Union of Fascists. Mr. Ross instructed me to use the motor car to take several injured men and women to the hospital. Many of the marchers had left Glasgow in September. Their boots were little more than scraps of leather, bound with rags. Blood ran from their torn feet. They intend to address parliament about the abolition of the means test. There is much concern that government agents infiltrated the march, wishing to discredit their peaceful aims.

Here we have exciting news. On Saturday evening, Mr. Ross introduced us to Miss Ethel MacDonald. They are engaged to be married. Farley Hall may indeed yet have an heir. A band played in the garden, and Miss Harris and I danced a celebratory jig around the kitchen table. Despite the 30 years between them, I believe this is a sincere love match.  

I am sure Miss MacDonald will take excellent care of Mr. Ross' health.

It will be a pleasure to see you next April, Miss Dorothea.

Your humble servant Herbert Morris.

–0–

30th October 1932 - Villa Rossini Lisbon

Dear Mr. Morris

Alas, my one true love, you have sadly deceived me. I wish you and Miss Harris a happy future together, and of course, I release you from any obligation toward me. I was not expecting many years of happiness; you being so much older than me, Herbert, but I had hoped to be a bride before considering a lonely widowhood.

Mr. Ross, it appears, has had his head turned by a pretty ankle. Ah well, there is no fool like an old fool. And no doubt he will keep you, and the future Mrs. Morris, in service together.

Ronnie Montagu arrived in Lisbon yesterday. Mother and I are now his house guests. Dear Ronnie's father is seriously ill, and Ronnie may have to return to London soon to be at his bedside, as a most thoughtful son should. It is my duty to be there to console him.

I must ask you, Herbert, not to write to me again. I should find it too upsetting.

Your heartbroken friend, Dorothea.
Looking up from my computer I see that the sky has turned that undefinable shade of grey, the one that promises snow. I take my cup of tea to the window and watch for the first flake to float down. Taking a mental tour of the pantry and the woodpile, I decided that yeah, we should be good and smile as the first one flutters by.

I smile because I remember that first sled ride. I'm bundled up in a snow suit, hood up, scarf around my neck, mittens on my hands. I'm sitting on the sled, beaming, squealing. Mickie is behind me, his short arms holding me, making sure I don't fall off. Okay, fine. I've seen the picture of dad pulling us along the sidewalk a thousand times. But I can remember it, almost.

Mickie was my best friend. We walked home from kindergarten together. He'd hold my hand when we'd cross the street. We made castles in the sandbox in the back yard. Watched cartoons, tickled and giggled, stuffed out faces with cookies and lemonade. We had sleepovers and talked in the dark, told fairy tales and ghost stories.

Then he went to first grade and left me in kindergarten. And I missed him.

Mick taught me the important stuff. How to shoot marbles, roller skate, ride a bike. He played "house" with me and then promptly "went to work". He knew the names of my dolls and would correct me when I'd forget. He showed me how to do math and rehearsed our French vocabulary. We had sleepovers and whispered in the dark, told each other our dreams and fears.

And then it wasn't cool anymore to have a friend that was a girl. And I missed him.

So, I wore jeans and sneakers. Never a skirt or cute sandals. Cut my hair short, figuring if I was more like a boy, more like his friends, he'd like me again. But Mick sneered, told me to act right and go away. Told his friends that I was afraid of spiders.

And I missed him.

By the time I was fourteen he had taught me that, sooner or later friends will leave you, turn their backs on you, tell you to go away. He had taught me to not count on others. And most of all to not show that you are hurting or lonely, because weakness would be ridiculed.

So, I disappeared but I still missed him.

When I was twenty-seven I was still single, rarely dated and worked freelance from home. My father had been sick, my mother was barely coping with having to take care of him, the house and the store. I didn't want to, but I packed up what little I owned and drove back to the small town where I had grown up. Through Main Street, past the grade school and the small kindergarten next to it, past the public pool and the small rec center. I turned at the bank and passed dad's hardware store. Two more blocks one more turn and I pulled into the drive. Mom was already on the porch before I got out of the car, wiping her hands on her apron, smiling. She had lost weight, looked tired. Why had I ignored her subtle hints about coming home?

"Come in, the tea is ready, cookies are just out of the oven. Your dad should be awake soon." I started to walk to the trunk. "Leave it. We'll get it later. Come. Sit."

We sat in silence at the kitchen table. After my first cup and third still-warm cookie, I finally asked. "How is he?" She swallowed, shook her head. "Weak, sleeps a lot. It's the pain meds." She shrugged. I nodded as if I knew. I was young, healthy, other than measles and chicken pox and the odd runny nose, I had never been sick. But then, neither had dad. She shrugged. "It's killing him that he can't go to work."

"Is he too weak?"

"Hm," She nodded. "And his immune system is shot, you know."

"How can I help? You want me in the store? Do the books? Nurse him?

She scoffed. "Oh, lord he wouldn't let you. No, go talk with Jason tomorrow. And go to the bank. They'll know what you need. But relax today."

"Marge?" A weak voice. Weak compared to the booming voice from my childhood. Mom nodded toward the dining room, now their bedroom. "Go on. It'll make his day."

On Monday, I walked to the store. Jason and Bert are happy to see me. "We're good, but yeah, look at the books if you want." They agreed the I needed to talk with the bank manager. So, I walked to the bank and asked Jolene, one of the tellers and an old classmate, if I could speak with the manager. She told me to "please have a seat; he'll be right out." While I waited, I watched people come and go, tried to match names with faces, but failed. I had been gone too long. For the past ten years, I'd just walk in the house for an odd weekend here, a holiday there, let mom feed me, listen to dad talk about the store and then I'd leave.

"Abs?" I looked up. "Mick." Smiling, he held out his hand to me. "How are you? How's your father?" I was looking at the grown-up version of my best friend. That little kid with the thick mop of chocolate hair and those big caramel eyes had grown into a tall, lean man with thick, short chocolate hair and caramels where other people had eyes. He was still smiling and holding my hand.

I coughed, swallowed. "Good. I'm good. You?" He nodded. "Come, let's talk."

He sat behind his desk; I took the client chair and told him what I thought I needed. He took notes and nodded. "Yes, we did that for your mother. I'll get the papers together. And we'll need is your father's signature."

"Well, yeah. Good luck with that." I mumbled. He laughed. "I'll go talk with him when I have the paperwork ready." He put his pen down. Looked at me. "How are you, Abby?"

I looked away. Don't let others look too closely, I remined myself. Don't trust anyone with your feelings. "I'm good. How about you? Wife, two point five kids, dog, picket fence? I joked, but I wanted to know.

He grinned, shook his head. "No wife, no kids. Yes, on the dog and the house. I inherited mom and dad's house when they passed. I'm slowly renovating it."

"You live next door?" I'm stunned. Why didn't mom tell me? "How long have you been there?"

"Three years, I think. Moved in after the accident." He shrugged

"I'm sorry." I stared at him. "I didn't know. What accident?"

He told me about the car accident that took his parents. "I'm so sorry, Mick." I let the news digest. "I liked your parents." Shaking my head.

He nodded. "They liked you too." We sat and stared at each other for a few long minutes then I looked away, forced a smile and stood up. I shook his hand. He promised to let me know when he's ready for my signatures. His smile looked as forced as mine felt.

"Why did you never tell me that Mick lives next door?" I asked mom over lunch.

"You guys had stopped talking. You wouldn't even say his name. I didn't want to upset you." She shrugged as if it was no big deal. For some stupid reason I felt tears burning behind my eyes. Come on girl! It's been ten years, Get over him already! "I never wanted to ask, but what did you two fight about?" She asked.

I shrugged, tried to swallow the lump in my throat. "I really don't know." I looked out the window over the sink and blinked away any threatening tears. "One day we were friends. The next I couldn't do anything right." I took a breath. "Like I was an embarrassment. So, I did what he told me to do. I went away."

Mom nodded. "That's why you wanted to go to that boarding school all of a sudden."

"Hm mm." I got up, put my dishes in the sink, grabbed my jacket and walked out the house. The pain that I had thought I had buried and let scar over, felt raw, suddenly. As if it happened yesterday. Mick had become more involved in sports. Team sports, one every season. Had less and less time to spend with me. So, I tried to learn about the sports he played, just to have things to talk about. When I'd see him, I'd join him, even when he was talking with his friends, his teammates. Then one day he told me to not do that anymore. To leave him alone. "Stop trying to be a boy. Stop hanging out with my friends. I don't know, go find some girls to play with."

Didn't he know that I had no girlfriends? Didn't he know that he was my only friend. The one who knew all my secrets. The one who could make me laugh, just by smiling at me. The only one who knew that I wanted to paint. I was lost that year. Too embarrassed to eat lunch alone, I'd hide in the school library. That's where I learned about the boarding school and begged my parents to let me go there. Of course, things were no better there. I was the new kid. The only one, it seemed, who had not been there since first grade. I still didn't fit in, but at least I didn't have to try and avoid Mick.

By the time I walked back into the kitchen, I had, almost, convinced myself that I could live with Mick being next door. After all, I had done it the first fourteen years of my life. I could do it again. For dad, for mom. I could do it. But I hadn't counted on seeing Mick sitting at the kitchen table laughing and joking with dad, munching cookies, as if he belonged there. I swallowed those pesky tears, again, plastered a smile on my face and signed whatever papers he put in front of me. "There, all set." He smiled. "Maybe we can go out to dinner, some day. What do you think, Ab?"

Confused, I looked at him. Why? What does he want from me? He told me to go away, I did. What does he want me to do now? But I shrugged. "Yeah, sure."

"Good. How about tomorrow? I'll pick you up at seven, okay?"

I was staring at the door, willing him to leave. Put me out of my misery. "Tomorrow?" I saw mom smiling and nodding. Did she say something to him? "Um, yeah, sure."

As soon as Mick had left and dad returned to bed, I turned to her. "Did you talk to him? Is that why he wants dinner? Did you make him feel guilty? I don't need a pity date."

Mom had always been easy-going, would rarely get angry or raise her voice. Well, okay, she didn't raise her voice then either, not with dad sleeping in the next room, but she did frown, and her voice was firm. "You listen to me Abby. That boy has been waiting for you to come home for the past ten years. He was thrilled last week, when I told him you were moving back. He has been as confused as I have about why you wouldn't talk to him. Jeez girl! You two were teenagers! Of course, he didn't know what to do with a friend that was a girl. Yes, I told him, Now, you go out with him and listen to him. And grow up."

She turned and started peeling potatoes.

Stunned I went to my room. Grow up? What did she mean, grow up? I hadn't been wrong, had I? What else should I have done? He told me to stay away from him. He didn't want to be my friend anymore, right? And if he didn't think I was good enough to be a friend, then nobody would, right? I had made the wiser choice, hadn't I? I hadn't hung around pining for him. I had done what he told me to do.

As I had done my whole life.

Well, yeah, looking at it that way... Geez! Yes, I had left because I was hurt and gone to lick my wounds. Was still licking them, to be honest. Was working from home, still hiding in my room, convinced that nobody would like me. I had never confronted him. Had never asked him what I had done wrong. I had just assumed that he was right, so there had to be something wrong with me. So, I deserved to be on my own for a lifetime, right?

So yeah, it took me a while, but I had to reluctantly, admit that mom was probably right. I needed to listen to Mick, but he needed to hear me, too. But whether I could do that in a restaurant and not embarrass myself, I didn't know.

The next morning, I rented a wheelchair from the local drugstore and bought some face masks. Mom and I took turns wheeling dad and cajoled him into wearing one of the masks before we entered the hardware store. He was thrilled to be the center of attention, to see the store again, to greet and be greeted. But he tired after an hour or so, and we wheel him back home. He slept the rest of the day. It was the last time he left the house.

Mick picked me up at seven. We acted awkwardly, as if it was our first date. Come to think of it, it was. We walked into to town. "So." I took a deep breath, "Mom told you, right?" He nodded. "I ..." I swallowed. "Yesterday she told me to grow up. So, I'm trying out my new big-girl britches." I took another breath, still stalling for time. "I should have asked you what I had done wrong." I held up my hand to stop him from interrupting. "No, I should have yelled at you for being rude and stupid. I should have slapped you around, instead of doing what I had done my whole life and do what you told me to do. My best friend, and let's face it, my first love had told me to go away, so I did." I sighed and swallowed, trying to get rid of that stupid lump in my throat.

We'd come to the center of town. In the middle of a small patch of green was the obligatory bandstand. Mick led the way up the steps. We had played here. Many years ago, we had pretended to be a marching band, even acted out our own version of Romeo and Julliet. With much giggling and eyerolling.

He took both my hands, I let him. "You are right. You should have yelled at me. I was an ass. You had changed. Suddenly you were talking about stats and plays. I was an idiot and couldn't, wouldn't see that I had changed too. I just knew that you weren't my Abby anymore. I meant to say to stop trying to be one of the boys. I wanted to keep you the way you were. I was a moron. I hurt you but I didn't know how to say sorry."

We sit side by side on the railing, staring at our feet. He nudged me. "Abs?"

"Hm?"

"I'm sorry."

I nodded. "So am I."

"Soo." He dragged the word out. "I was your first love, hm?" I nodded and blushed, still memorizing my shoes. "Who was your second love?" He probed.

I swallowed, took a breath, opened my mouth, swallowed again, wiped my eyes. Shook my head. "There is no number two," I whispered.

Mick handed me his handkerchief. I looked at it as if I had never seen one before. "Good. Though I was kind-a looking forward to a good fight." He chuckled softly.

That was thirty-five years ago.

The snow is coming down a little faster, a little thicker, seems to stick and pile up. The world looks softer, clean and prettier from this side of the window.

He's late.

Just as I start to worry, I see his SUV turn the corner. Ham, our thirteen-year-old mutt slaps his tail against the floor as he recognizes the sound of the car. I walk to the door and let him in. My best friend, the one with the white and dark chocolate hair and caramel eyes, is home.

"Dinner'll be ready in a few." I whisper before his lips find mine.

"Later." He mumbles.

"Hm mm." I still do what he tells me to do, most of the time.