The events are taking place in the Opportunity Petal, Thematic Arena 2 (TA2 225). All the sessions are
open to the press and will be livestreamed here. The brochure, with full information about the events,
speakers and other resources can be found here.
Linking agendas of the UNFCCC & the World Health Assembly in Latin America & the Caribbean, 09.30-
10.45 GST
How can we synergize the global health agenda on climate change and the global climate change agenda
on health? This event will map out two policy processes: the UNFCCC and the World Health Assembly
(WHA). The aim of the event is to generate greater awareness across disciplines of different policy
forums addressing similar issues, and how research, policy, and advocacy should be aligned to maximize
the impact of both forums.
Vital point: Our Future, Our Action, 11.15-12.30 GST
This side event brings together a diverse array of key stakeholders, to foster a dynamic exchange on the
critical nexus between youth, health, and the environment in shaping a sustainable future. Linked to
three pivotal processes in the realm of climate change and health, "Vital Point" draws inspiration from
the Budapest Youth Declaration, echoes the establishment of the EHP Partnership on Youth and the
WHO Youth Council's Working Group on Climate Change and Health. The session aims to translate
these processes into actionable initiatives, decipher their implications for the future of climate change
and health, infuse a strong youth perspective into climate change and health discussions, and reinforce
policy commitments.
Rising Tides, Resilient Health: Navigating the 7th Cholera Pandemic and Beyond with the Global
Taskforce on Cholera Control, 13.30-14.45 GST
This panel looks at the impact of climate health in the unfolding of the 7th Cholera Pandemic, which
affects the lives and livelihoods of 1 billion people. Against a background of systemic under-investment
in water and sanitation and lack of vaccine availability, cholera is the poster child of poverty, social
injustice, climate change, and conflict.
The panel explores how the Global Taskforce on Cholera Control – a partnership that includes
international organizations, academic institutions, and UN agencies – places cholera as a tool to improve
2
climate adaptation, increase the resilience of communities to health emergencies, and contribute to
creating sustainable wealth among those currently affected by cholera. The event emphasizes the
ticking clock leading to 2030, the target year to reduce cholera deaths by 90 per cent. Together, the
panel explores innovative solutions at the intersection of climate, health, and finance to enable locally
led solutions. 
Preliminary 2023 data from Member States indicate that the number of cases reported this year as of 15 November
has surpassed that of 2022, with over 610 000 cases and 3500 deaths, corresponding to a case fatality rate (CFR) of
0.6%. This finding must be interpreted with caution given that 2023 data are not directly comparable to the more
comprehensive official reports to WHO from previous years.
• Since the last situation report on the multi-country outbreak of cholera published on 2 November 2023 (covering data
reported until 15 of October), and as of 15 November 2023, no new country has reported an outbreak of cholera or
acute watery diarrhoea (AWD), although new outbreaks have been reported within affected countries. In total, 29
countries have reported cases since 1 January 2023.
• Almost one year has passed since WHO graded the global cholera resurgence as a grade 3 (highest internal grade)
emergency. In an effort to reflect on lessons learned and adjust the ongoing response, WHO is reviewing its response
to cholera globally and will make evidence-based adjustments where needed to better coordinate activities across all
levels of the response
• Based on the large number of outbreaks and their geographic expansion, as well as the shortage of vaccines and other
resources, WHO continues to assess the risk at global level as very high.
• The WHO African Region remains the most impacted, with 16 countries having reported cholera cases since the
beginning of the year. In the South-East Africa subregion, Zimbabwe continues to report concerning increases in cases
since mid-September, especially in the provinces of Harare, Masvingo and Manicaland. Flare-ups and further
geographic spread of cases are also observed in Mozambique. Cases are also reported in Lusaka province, Zambia.
The subregion is currently in the rainy season, which typically raises the risk of cholera transmission.
• In the Greater Horn of Africa, despite a declining trend from a weekly average of 800 cases, Ethiopia continues to
report over 400 cases per week, with Tigray being the tenth and latest region to be affected and further geographic
spread within already affected regions of the country. In Sudan, the number of total cases has doubled since the
previous situation report, with close to 3000 cases and 95 associated deaths being reported from seven states:
Gedaref, Gezira, Kassala, Khartoum, Red Sea, Sennar, and South Kordofan. Surveillance and response activities
remain a significant challenge in the country amid the ongoing humanitarian crisis.
• WHO continues to work with partners at the global, regional, and country levels to support Member States in responding
to the outbreaks.
