How to stop over-medicalising mental health
What the world could learn from Britain’s flawed approach
Listen to this story. Enjoy more audio and podcasts on iOS or Android.
For a place with a reputation for buttoned-up stoicism, Britain is remarkably open about mental health. The British are more likely than people in any other rich country to think that mental illness is a disease like any other. Only the Swedes are more accepting of the idea that a history of mental-health problems should not disqualify someone from public office. The importance of good mental health is a cause vigorously championed by everyone from the Princess of Wales to the opposition leader, Sir Keir Starmer; employers preach the gospel of well-being. Britons were once encouraged to hide their feelings; now they are urged to seek support.

Much of the rich world has struggled with rising rates of self-reported mental-health problems, particularly since the covid-19 pandemic. But the numbers in Britain are startling. Around 4.5m Britons were in contact with mental-health services in 2021-22, a rise of almost 1m in five years. In the past decade no other European country has seen a greater increase in the use of antidepressants. A National Health Service (nhs) survey in 2023 found that one in five 8- to 16-year-olds in England had a probable mental disorder, up from one in eight in 2017. In 17- to 19-year-olds the figure had increased from one in ten to one in four. The number of people who are out of work with mental-health conditions has risen by a third between 2019 and 2023.

It is good that people do not feel they must bottle things up and the suffering from mental illnesses is real. Awareness of mental health has diminished the stigma of some conditions and revealed that many Britons’ needs are not met. But awareness has caused damage, too.

For all their good intentions, campaigns intended to raise awareness are leading some people to conflate normal responses to life’s difficulties with mental-health disorders. Special treatment creates incentives for people to seek diagnoses and to medicalise problems unnecessarily. The need to treat people with milder conditions competes with care for those who have the most severe ones.

Start with the idea that mental health has become a catch-all term. The sheer proportions of people who say they have a disorder is a red flag. Some 57% of university students claim to suffer from a mental-health issue; over three-quarters of parents with school-age children sought help or advice over their child’s mental health in 2021-22. In surveys Britons increasingly describe grief and stress as mental illnesses, redefining how sickness is understood. Most conditions do not yet have objective biomarkers, so self-reported symptoms weigh heavily in official statistics and in diagnostic processes.

People have incentives to label mild forms of distress as a disorder. In 2022 more than a quarter of 16- and 18-year-olds in British schools were given extra time in official exams because of a health condition. Evidence of a mental-health problem can unlock welfare payments. Certification need not come from an nhs doctor: plenty of private clinics stand ready to provide it. Firms may prefer to label stress a disorder rather than deal with the consequences of acknowledging that working conditions are poor (the World Health Organisation implies that good management is the best way to protect mental health in the workplace). The highest rates of diagnosed depression occur among England’s poorest people, but the government probably prefers prescribing antidepressants to trying to solve poverty.

Medicalising mild distress may not benefit patients. One study of mindfulness courses in 84 British schools found that normal teaching was just as good for mental health. But the great harm from overdiagnosis is to those who most need help.

The nhs, in theory, is able to triage patients by need. In practice, a service that has long been understaffed and poorly organised is struggling with surging demand. The number of young people in contact with mental-health services has expanded at more than three and a half times the rate of the workforce in child and adolescent psychiatry. A 22% increase in the overall mental-health workforce in the five years to 2021-22 could never have matched a 44% increase in referrals for all patients. At least 1.8m people are waiting for mental-health treatment.

Increased demand is driving staff into private practice. Clinicians burned out from dealing with the most severe nhs cases can earn as much as £1,000 ($1,265) a session conducting assessments of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. The nhs has only 6% more consultant psychiatrists than a decade ago, compared with 86% more consultants in emergency medicine. The police pick up some of the pieces—officers in England spend around 1m hours a year with mental-health patients in accident-and-emergency departments—but that is not treatment. Even as awareness of mental-health conditions rises, outcomes for people with severe mental illnesses, such as bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, are worsening; they die 15-20 years earlier than the rest of the population, a gap that was widening before covid-19 and was exacerbated by it.

Rethinking Britain’s approach to mental health requires several changes. More money should go on research so that individuals are treated appropriately; mental disorders absorb 9% of England’s health budget but 6% of medical-research funding. The social causes of mental illness should also receive more attention. Earlier this year the government shelved an ambitious plan to look at the underlying context for mental disorders, from poverty to isolation; that plan should be revived. More time and effort should be devoted to those most in need of help; reforming the Mental Health Act, a punitive law that still criminalises the mentally ill, would be a start.

Causes and affect
Above all, Britain needs to avoid the mass medicalisation of mild forms of distress. Funnelling people into an overstretched health-care system is having predictable effects. All suffering should be taken seriously, but a diagnosis is not always in someone’s best interests; one recent piece of research found that volunteers were happier when they learned to suppress negative thoughts. Britain has become more compassionate about mental health. It needs to become more thoughtful, too. 
America has had a Cuban agent in its midst for 42 years
Cuba’s spooks punch well above their weight
Insiders have long known that Cuba’s foreign intelligence agency—the Intelligence Directorate, or dgi in its Spanish acronym—punches above its weight. Evidence of that came on December 4th when the us Justice Department charged Victor Manuel Rocha, a former American ambassador, with secretly serving as a Cuban agent for 42 years.

Mr Rocha would be one of the highest-placed moles that America’s government has recently found. An indictment says that he started working for Cuba no later than in 1981 and joined the State Department that year. He went on to become the top official for the Americas in the National Security Council in the White House, a senior diplomat in Havana, deputy ambassador in Argentina and ambassador in Bolivia between 1999 and 2002.

Even after retirement, Mr Rocha had access to valuable intelligence. From 2006 to 2012 he was an adviser to the head of the Pentagon’s Southern Command, which has responsibility for Latin America. He was in contact with the dgi as recently as 2016 or 2017. He was caught in a sting when the fbi pretended to be his new handler. He is said to have praised Fidel Castro, Cuba’s revolutionary leader, as “the Comandante”, referred to the United States as “the enemy” and described Cuban spooks as compañeros, or comrades. “What we have done”, he is said to have boasted, is “enormous …more than a grand slam.”

Mr Rocha is not the first such case. “I don’t find this particularly surprising,” says Duyane Norman, who ran the cia’s Latin American operations. “Pound for pound Cuba is recognised as one of the better intelligence services in the world.” Cuban intelligence was modelled on the Soviet kgb and East German Stasi. It penetrated the United States in the 1970s and 1980s, focusing on the recruitment of women and Hispanic men. In 1987 Florentino Aspillaga Lombard, a top Cuban intelligence officer, defected and revealed that virtually every cia agent on the island since the 1960s had been plants, or later turned and fed misinformation.

American spooks have long acknowledged that their Cuban counterparts were part of, as one government report noted, “a first-rate intelligence service” who could run “highly aggressive operations…throughout the world”. One reason for this was that, as in other communist countries, the brightest often gravitate to positions that bring power and privilege, such as the opportunity to live abroad, says Mr Norman. “They have been cultivating a class of genuine professional intelligence officers for a long time,” he adds.

Those officers have taken a long-term view. “One of the hallmarks of a lot of Cuban operations is patience,” says Mr Norman, allowing recruits to rise to positions of prominence over time. He points to the example of the “Cuban Five”, a group of intelligence officers arrested in Miami in 1998 and accused of infiltrating anti-Castro groups. Mr Rocha was recruited at around aged 30 and helped by the dgi to join the State Department.

Cuba’s biggest known success was Ana Montes, the top Cuba analyst in the Pentagon’s Defence Intelligence Agency (dia). She had been recruited by Cuban intelligence in 1984, trained in Havana and served as an agent for 17 years until her arrest in 2001. In that time she revealed the names of four American undercover officers in Cuba and details of operations in El Salvador, Nicaragua and Panama.

The case of Ms Montes, who was released from prison in January, illustrates another reason why the dgi has enjoyed such success. Cuba does not need to resort to what Russia calls kompromat, compromising material to blackmail would-be agents, says Mr Norman. Ideology is often enough. Just as Soviet spies traded on the appeal of anti-fascism and socialism in the 1930s, so too did the dgi exploit the (former) romance of the Cuban revolution.

In the cold war the kgb had to pay, often handsomely, to recruit many of its best agents. Mr Rocha and Ms Montes apparently worked for free. Ms Montes was radicalised by the Reagan administration’s policy in Latin America, including its intervention in Grenada in 1983 and its support for the Contras, right-wing rebels, in Nicaragua. She was, she later told the fbi, a “comrade in the struggle” against America. Mr Rocha, though adopting right-wing garb—last year he contributed to the re-election effort of an anti-Castro congresswoman—was driven by the same ideology. He boasted that his “number-one priority” was to prevent any action “that would endanger…the revolution itself.” 